if a woman has obesity and diabetes she
has quadruple the risk of having an
autistic child but I want to go deeper
and most people don't know this
something horrible has happened Dr Chris
Palmer the Harvard psychiatrist whose
groundbreaking new research could be the
missing piece to cure the mental health
epidemic mental disorders are the
leading cause of disease and disability
worldwide governments are actually
labeling them as terminal illnesses and
to allow people to die by assisted
suicide and they're going to allow them
to die because they know what I'm saying
is true they know that our treatments
fail people year after year after year
and what I'm here to say is you can in
fact get better how I struggled with
mental illness myself for 20 years I
tried to kill myself several times there
was no hope for me
whatsoever and I was furious with the
mental health field for being so
incompetent and I wanted to try to help
and the thing that people have not open
their eyes to is the science of
metabolic health and there's tiny things
in our cells that can heal and recover
people who have had chronic horrible
mental illnesses really yes and if
autism is genetic it shouldn't quadruple
in 20 years these are facts and we can
do something about it today but the
easiest way to understand it is that
quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to subscribe helps us scale the
guest helps us scale the production and
it makes this show bigger so if I could
ask you for one favor if you've watched
the show before and you've enjoyed it
and you like this episode that you're
currently watching could you please hit
the Subscribe button thank you so much
and I will pay that gesture by making
sure that everything we do here gets
better and better and better and better
that is a promise I'm willing to make
you do we have a
[Music]
deal Chris when you
speak before we started recording you
speak with a deep authentic sense of
mission and that underneath there is a
personal driver that is
unimat and that is getting you out of
bed every day because I could see it in
your eyes I could see it in the way that
you said the words that you said to me
where does that drive begin for you what
was the Catalyst moment in your life
that inspired you and gave you that fire
that seems to be unquenchable to pursue
the path that you've pursued you know I
struggled with mental illness myself
starting in
childhood nobody recognized it nobody
diagnosed it I didn't know what it was
nobody knew what it was I just knew I
was different and
somehow ostracized for who I was and it
just felt like part of who I am and then
a series of horrible tragic events
happened in my extended
family when I was about 12 years
old and my mother ended up having a
nervous breakdown she called it a
nervous break break down it started with
what we would call major depression
quickly escalated to depression with
suicidality and then she developed
psychotic symptoms she became very
delusional she got mental health
treatment but the treatment didn't
work they basically were just kind of in
my 12-year-old mind the psychiatrists
were just drugging her
and those drugs weren't making her
symptoms better they weren't restoring
her
health she went on to live the rest of
her life with a chronic psychotic
disorder and that disorder completely
ruined and devastated her life in so
many ways she lost everything she lost
custody of her eight kids she lost all
of her money everything that courts
didn't give her any support or any money
I had my own
struggles even worse with mental illness
after all of that I ended up leaving
home before I finished high school I had
chronic depression and suicidality and
OCD and other things and the mental
health field was worthless for me and
probably caused a lot of harm for
me and so the the end of the day the
reason I'm a
psychiatrist is because I recognize how
horrible and
devastating mental illness can
be and I came to the field
really angry with the mental health
field for being so
incompetent and I wanted to try to help
I wanted to try to maybe contribute to
better solutions for
people my futile attempts to save you
from the ravages of mental illness lit a
fire in me that burns to this day I'm
sorry I didn't figure this out in time
to help you may you rest in
peace that's my mom and that's the
dedication of the book her story and the
devastation to her
life is the thing that drives me to this
day um and I just know that there are
hundreds of Millions millions of
people just like her with different
diagnoses with different
symptoms but the devastation to their
lives is the same and those people
deserve
better and I want to help them I want to
get them better
treatment those people those people
exist on some kind of I guess multiple
different spectrums of disorder what are
those spectrums of disorder
and what are what are those disorders
that you're referring to when you say
those people are the people that I want
to
help people who are diagnosed with a
mental
illness and
so you know the
diagnoses are all over the map we have
all of these different diagnoses and the
DSM
5tr the diagnostic and statistical
Manual of Psych patry which is kind of
considered the Bible of Psychiatry and
it has all of these labels in it um
schizophrenia bipolar disorder major
depressive
disorder alcohol use disorder which most
people know as
alcoholism other
addictions uh anorexia
nervosa but
also autism autism spectrum disorder or
dementia that most people know as
Alzheimer's
disease that those are all of the labels
in our um in our kind of Bible of
Psychiatry and the reality is that when
you look at the treatment
outcomes for people who are getting
treatment for those diagnostic
labels there is no doubt that our
treatments do work for a lot of people
millions of
people and so millions of people are
helped their lives can be saved by the
current treatments that we have and I'm
not here to take that away from anyone
so for people who are getting treatment
and those treatments are working keep
getting that treatment I don't want to
interfere with anyone's access to those
medications or
psychotherapies or electr convulsive
therapy or whatever treatment they're
getting I don't want to stand in the way
but there are far too many people just
like my mother who did everything they
were asked to do who took all of the
pills who showed up for their therapy
appointments who did everything they
were asked to do and they're not getting
better you know mental disorders as an
as a whole are now the leading cause of
disease burden and disability worldwide
and it's not because those people aren't
getting treatment many of them are
getting treatment yes there are people
who can't afford treatment or can't get
access to
care but a lot of people are getting
treatment I work at one of the best
psychiatric hospitals in the world I
have the privilege of doing that and we
see patients that aren't getting better
we see them all the time day in and day
out
and the crisis the tragedy is that some
governments are actually now moving to
labeling mental illnesses as terminal
illnesses the Canadian
government in March of
2024 is going to allow people to die by
assisted
suicide because of a treatment resistant
mental illness really yes they're going
to allow them to die and they're going
to allow them to die because they know
what I'm saying is true they know that
our treatments fail people year after
year after year and those people become
desperate and
hopeless and they give up on treatment
for good reason because they've
participated in treatment for decades
and it hasn't helped them and the
Canadian government has now made the
decision that they should be allowed to
die with the help of a
physician who can prescribe deadly
medications and make it easy for them to
die by
Suicide the UK is now labeling some
people with eating disorders as terminal
eating
disorders and that maybe you know if
they've exhausted treatment if they've
had treatment for several years or more
than a decade well treatment's just not
going to work for them so let's call
them terminally ill with an eating
disorder people are frustrated and
hopeless again I'm not talking about the
people for whom treatment's working if
treatment is working for someone if
they're taking a pill and it's working
fantastic you're lucky keep doing it and
I don't want to interfere with anyone's
access to that
treatment but we can't hide from the
tragic realities of the the
world for all of those people that are
they might have extreme anxiety
depression schizophren osity these
extreme sort of mental health
disorders what is it that you want to
put into their hearts and Minds with
your work with the message that you're
spreading what is it that those people
need to know and I I say that not as all
of the details which we're going to go
into but the very Topline message that
you know maybe in a sentence you want
those people to
have if you have been trying treatment
and those treatments aren't working for
you please don't give up there is hope
you can in fact get better if you
understand the science you can get
better the mental health conversation
the uh prevalence of mental
health lots of these things seem to have
changed in the last 28 years what is the
state of mental
health as we sit here today and how has
that changed in the 28 years that you've
been at Harvard and working in this
field I think I have a slightly
different perspective yours sounded more
hopeful than
mine you kind of said things have
changed in 28 years and tragically I
actually feel like they haven't changed
a whole
lot if you look at if you look globally
at the
problem the problem of mental illness is
increasing
it is not stagnant and is not decreasing
it is increasing in prevalence
throughout the
world prior to the pandemic about 1
billion people had a mental or substance
use disorder representing about 133% of
the world's population and that was just
in one given year
2017 the pandemic added insult to injury
and rates are much higher now and the
rates of mental illness have been in
increasing across a wide range of
diagnostic categories rates of autism in
the United States over the last 20 years
have
quadrupled a four-fold increase rates of
ADHD are up and through the roof rates
of bipolar disorder in adults a lot of
people think bipolar disorder that's
genetic well in adults in the United
States over the last 20 years rates have
doubled in children and Adolescence
rates are through the roof up
exponentially thousandfold percent rates
of plain old bread and butter depression
major depressive
disorder the Gallup pole does an annual
survey in the United States of current
and lifetime prevalence of depression
and just this year in
2023 rates of both both current
prevalence and lifetime prevalence
reached alltime ever recorded highs so
we have a catastrophe we have an
epidemic mental illness is a growing
escalating
problem and I wish that I could say our
treatments were dramatically better
there is no doubt we do have new
treatment options we have ketamine and
psychedelics we've got transcranial
magnetic stimulation which wasn't around
when I first
started we have some new
medications but the real answer is the
medications that we have are no better
than the old medications because they're
all based on the same
mechanisms so companies are simply
repeating what we already know kind of
sort of works and they're just making
new molecules that kind of sort of do
the same thing and so they still just
kind of sort of work they don't work for
everyone and they even fail to work for
most people in the largest study ever
done of
depression when people come in the very
first anti-depressant treatment they get
over 4,000 people treated at the best
academic centers that we have in the
United
States the first antidepressant
treatment only about 30% get a
remission that means 70% % still have
major depressive disorder they have
enough symptoms to still be labeled
clinically
depressed even if the pill helped them a
little bit it didn't help them enough to
make their symptoms enough of their
symptoms go away now even those 30% who
got a remission many of them are still
having low-grade symptoms like all of
their symptoms didn't go away and after
four levels of treatment
the original published report said that
67% got a remission after four different
types of treatment for major depressive
disorder if we take that at face value
that means onethird of patients are
still clinically depressed after four
levels of
treatment other researchers have
challenged that 67% figure because the
reality is half of the people in that
study dropped out because it just wasn't
working out for them so we got a problem
there like this this protocol clearly
isn't working out well for people when
half of the people are dropping out of
your
study and the second problem is that
there are some researchers who point out
that they changed the criteria for
remission during the study they
prospectively said they were going to
Define remission in a very certain way
using certain
metrics those researchers said if they
stuck to their
protocol only about 35% got a remission
after four treatment
levels that would mean two-thirds of
people after getting four levels of
treatment are still clinically
depressed and that is the current state
of affairs for
depression something that we all know
something that we've got so many
treatments for if we look at more quote
unquote serious mental disorders like
bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia the results are
abysmal the one large study of 6,000
patients with
schizophrenia only 4% of the patients
got a recovery meaning that their
symptomss were in full and complete
remission they were they had a decent
quality of life and that they were able
to function in the world they were able
to have a job or go to school only 4% of
people with schizophrenia got that using
our best treatments available
today those statistics aren't a lot
better than they
were 50 years ago tra
magically Chris when people say to you
or when people say the quite common
rebuttal that the reason we're seeing
this rise in mental health disorders is
just because there's more of a
conversation about it so more people are
stepping forward we now have a word for
it so there's just more labeling and
these mental health disorders like the
ones you've named and even things like
ADHD and autism um it's just because
there's more conversation going on and
these things aren't in fact
increasing that is a common argument and
I would
argue
that it's like just putting your head in
the
sand the easiest place to get an
accurate
read on the true prevalence of mental
illness and not just the recognition of
it but the true prevalence of it is to
talk to school teachers who've been
teaching for more than 30 years if you
ask
them were you just not recognizing the
children 30 years ago who are screaming
and tantruming in your classroom were
you just not recognizing the children
who were melting down when they got bad
grades and injuring themselves in class
were you just not recognizing the level
of Despair that you and anxiety that you
see in
children did you just have your head in
the sand back then and now since
everybody's talking about it you see
those behaviors you see those symptoms
the school teachers and the guidance
counselors will laugh at you and say no
no
no something has
happened something horrible has
happened I wasn't ignoring mental health
30 years ago I wasn't ignoring despair
30 years years ago I wasn't ignoring
extremee anxiety and panic I wasn't
ignoring Tantrums in my classroom 30
years
ago they are skyrocketing in
prevalence if we look at emergency
rooms so emergency rooms in the United
States that's I can speak best about
statistics here in the United
States um but I think in most Western
countries these statistics
are similar we have a
crisis in mental health in emergency
rooms in particular youth mental health
but it's across the board we have all of
these children and adolescents showing
up to emergency rooms having attempted
suicide or they're becoming
psychotic and they're diagnosed with
bipolar
disorder at skyrocketing
rates
and and we don't have enough services to
treat these people these kids these
adolescents our children we don't have
places to put them so they sit in
emergency rooms not getting Optimal Care
simply getting medicated sometimes
restrained to a hospital gurnie so that
they don't try to run away or hurt
themselves talk to anybody in an
emergency room we're see
that those people weren't hiding in
their
homes 30 years
ago something's
happening they are actively acting on
mental health symptoms they are acting
out of
Despair the suicide rate has gone up if
you in the United States or the last 20
years total suicide rate has gone up by
about
30% but if you look at a different
statistic called deaths of
Despair it has doubled in 20 years
deaths of Despair includes not only
suicides but also deaths from alcohol
use drug overdoses and others those are
mental health problems those are
addictions they are mental health
disorders they are in
DSM rates have doubled
in 20 years people weren't dying 30
years ago and we just didn't recognize
it and now we're recognizing death now
we're recognizing suicide we didn't
really recognize it 30 years ago but now
we recogniz no no no we we know we know
what death is morticians know how to
recognize it and diagnose it and the
rates are skyrocketing a doubling in 20
years that is nothing to
ignore that begs the
question what do you believe is causing
it because clearly you know when I've
heard people when I say people I mean
just the you know the things you see in
culture and media or maybe on Instagram
that say you know there's a chemical
imbalance in people's brains I've always
struggled with that I understand there
might be sometimes but I've struggled
with that as a broad answer to a very
complicated Nuance set of issues because
I just have a a bias to believing that
hum aren't born broken you know I
believe that you know my ancestors go
back very I've got a lot of ancestors
that um I understand how natural you
know natural selection and evolution
works I don't think that I was born
broken so I think maybe there's an
environmental factor maybe something I'm
I'm doing or something we're doing as a
society is increasing these rates of
suicidality that you talk
about what you believe is the answer
that we're missing or not talking about
enough the root causes which we can can
get to and and I have lots of ideas and
thoughts on it if you want to get into
the weeds of like what are the exact
causes we can talk about that but the
thing that people have not opened their
eyes
to is the science of what we call
metabolism or metabolic
health and what I ultimately am arguing
the easiest way for me to put it is that
what I'm arguing is that mental health
condition The Chronic serious ones in
which the brain isn't functioning
properly brain disorders that are
causing mental health symptoms those are
the things I'm talking about now that
we're all susceptible to you believe I
think we're all susceptible to it those
in fact are metabolic disorders
affecting the
brain and so the easiest way to
understand why do we see skyrocketing
rates of mental illness
it's not a
coincidence that we're seeing those
skyrocketing rates at the same time that
we see skyrocketing rates of obesity
overweight diabetes and pre-diabetes
which are also
metabolic
conditions that all of those things are
rising
simultaneously and that the brain is an
organ and so some people can have
metabolic problems
and some people can be thin and still
have a metabolic problem so it's I'm not
at all saying that obesity is the only
driver because a lot of times people
think about it in that way so are you
saying obesity comes first and then
everybody gets a mental illness no I'm
not saying it that way sometimes the
mental illness starts
first because it's a manifestation of
metabolic dysfunction in the
brain and it basically means the brain
isn't working working right and so
somebody might have unrelenting
depression or unexplainable anxiety or
psychotic symptoms or bipolar symptoms
or eating disorder symptoms or substance
use disorder
symptoms that they may
have symptoms but all of those things
are a manifestation of metabolic
dysfunction in the brain can you explain
metabolic dysfunction to me like I'm a
10-year-old
the easiest way to explain it is that
our bodies and our brains are made up of
cells and all of our cells need two
essential things to function properly
they need food
oxygen those are the big ones that most
people know it gets more much more
complicated fast because food contains
all sorts of nutrients so we need
certain vitamins and nutrients and
hormones are playing a role all sorts of
things are playing a role
but at the end of the day that's what
metabolism is metabolism is taking food
and oxygen and keeping us
alive they are
fundamental to our health but also the
function of our cells and when something
goes wrong in that process and there are
lots of things that can go
wrong when something goes wrong with
taking food and oxygen and turning it
into
energy
the cell can
malfunction and when it happens in your
brain it means that your brain can
malfunction and the way that we know the
brain is
malfunctioning are all of the symptoms
of mental
illness when
somebody has depression for no good
reason when somebody has anxiety for no
good
reason when somebody
just has experiences like hallucinations
or delusions for no good reason that all
of those things represent the brain
malfunctioning if you could take me one
step deeper into this idea of you know
food and oxygen being converted into
energy in the cell um something goes
wrong
there what goes wrong why does it go
wrong so the real answer is it's
extraordinarily comp licated there are
many Pathways in metabolism there are
many things that play a role but the
easiest way to understand it and the way
to unify it the helpful insight the
immensely helpful
insight and this is new Cutting Edge
information most people don't know
this but there are these tiny things in
our cells called
mitochondria and
they are actually the primary sites in
our cells that food and oxygen are
getting converted into energy or
building blocks for our
cells when you do a deep dive into the
science of
mitochondria you can actually begin to
understand what's happening in the
brains and bodies of people with mental
illness
and you can begin to understand all of
these very complicated things like why
would neurotransmitters become
imbalanced that's what what's causing a
neurotransmitter imbalance if there even
is one what's causing a hormone
imbalance what's causing higher levels
of inflammation in the brains and bodies
of people with metabolic and mental
disorders um what about the gut
microbiome how does that play a role but
what about stress and Trauma
psychological stress trauma how do those
things fit
in mitochondria are actually the
scientific way to begin to connect all
of those dots and help us
understand why the brains of some people
quote unquote malfunction or why they
are
disregulated might be a better way to
put it or why some people can't seem to
quote unquote get over it get over a
trauma or get over a breakup with
someone what's going on why aren't they
more resilient why can't they pull it
together mitochondrial dysfunction as
nerdy and sciency as that is can help us
connect the dots what do I need to know
about the mitochondria what it is I know
it's in every cell in my body um is is
there anything else I need to know about
it before we explore these through lines
and how all these other things come back
and connect to the
mitochondria so mitochondria are present
in most cells in the body not not every
single human the the glaring example are
red blood cells which actually lose
their mitochondria they have them when
they are first forming but then they
lose their mitochondria so red blood
cells interestingly don't live all that
long um we're constantly creating new
ones and turning them over so most
people know mitochondria as the
PowerHouse of the cell which means they
take food and oxygen and turn it into
ATP and that's what most people learn in
school they're the PowerHouse of the
cell but I'm here to tell you they are
so so much more than that there are
hundreds or thousands of them in most
cells they are highly
Dynamic at one point you know the the
theory of
multicellular life on planet
Earth is that mitochondria were once
Independent Living
bacteria and that another single cell
organism engulfed that very first
bacterium and the two of
those organisms lived they stayed alive
usually when you get engulfed by another
organism that means getting eaten and
you you die for whatever reason
these two stayed alive and they became
symbiotic with each
other and actually that event is thought
to maybe have only happened
once on Earth and that single
organism evolved into all multicellular
life that we know today so all living
organisms that we can see with our eyes
plants all animals are
evolved from that same organism so
mitochondria divide and replicate they
actually move around cells they fuse
with each other they Bud off from each
other they they form patterns around the
nucle cell nucleus which plays a role in
which genes get expressed or don't get
expressed they do all sorts of things
when people say that we have a
predisposition a genetic predisposition
to mental health disorders and that you
know you'll have depression if
depression runs in your family Etc is
there Merit in that in your view is
there evidence to support that
absolutely so we know that we know that
mental illness runs in
families genes explain some of that but
not all of that the environment actually
can influence things called epigenetic
factors which are factors
that control the expression of genes
they turn genes on or off and those
epigenetic factors are actually
inheritable you can inherit them from
your parents and so it's not all
strictly
genetics um some of it is epigenetic so
first and foremost there are no genes
that are specific to specific disorders
most people think well you know if
bipolar disorder runs in my family there
must be a bipolar disorder
Gene and in fact there isn't a bipolar
disorder Gene there are genes that
increase risk for bipolar disorder but
at the same time they also increase risk
for schizophrenia and epilepsy and
autism and depression and other types of
mental and neurological
disorders and if you look at the
unifying theme like is there a theme for
these genes is there a common pathway
that can help us better understand
mental illness the common pathway is
that most of the genes are affecting
metabolism and
mitochondria one research study that
came out a couple years ago researchers
have been looking for years at a a
high-risk Gene for
schizophrenia um and we know that people
who have this very very rare genes so
almost nobody has it but if you do have
it you're at high risk for developing
schizophrenia along with lots of other
mental illnesses but schizophrenia is
the big one and the researchers did this
deep dive into trying to understand what
exactly is this Gene doing and at the
end of the day they said it's affecting
mitochondria and that is probably how it
is causing schizophrenia metabolism that
happens as a result of the work of the
mitochondria is that accurate so want to
make sure I've I'm clear on them before
we proceed 90% of of metabolism at least
is occurring in mitochondria so
it's that definition as a scientist I
have to say isn't 100% accurate because
there is a thing called
glycolysis that can happen in cells
where you can actually produce ATP
without using mitochondria what's that
so ATP is usually known as the energy
currency of living organisms of cells
and so um and that that ATP ends up
making cells work it is the energy
that's flowing around cells or the
molecule that's flowing around cells to
make receptors work to to make all of
the Machinery of cells work and that
becomes relevant maybe some of your
listeners will know this if you exercise
really hard like you're running a
marathon or you're running as far as you
can get with a marathon before you
absolutely are exhausted and you just
have to stop your mitochondria will
actually become maxed out that is what's
preventing you from running is your
mitochondria max out and they they're
it's like you don't have enough of them
or they're not healthy enough and so
they just they can't keep you going they
can't keep your muscles going and so you
Peter out and when you Peter out you
start you turn to this process called
glycolysis which actually ends up
producing lactic acid or lactate and so
Runners will get higher levels of LA
lactate and and then that can create
soreness and all sorts of things um but
uh yeah that's so metabolism is really
the process of taking food and energy
food and oxygen I'm sorry and turning it
into energy or building blocks and that
can occur on a small scale outside of
mitochondria but as soon as the
mitochondria in most of your cells are
dysfunctional or dead you you die
there's no way around it
so let's use some of those examples that
you gave earlier you talked about stress
and Trauma and these kinds of things I'm
really Keen to know how a traumatic
event can have an impact on your
metabolism your mitochondria which then
manifests as a mental illness um so if
we take trauma for example people go
through early trauma in their life I
don't know there's a I mean you had a
very traumatic upbringing how do you
think that maybe even in your case if
you were able to see inside of your body
and what was happening that external um
traumatic event came into your body in
some way caused a physiological reaction
had an impact on your metabolism which
results in a mental health disorder of
source it gets a little complicated
because it it goes through a couple of
stages so I'll try to walk you through
it in the simplest way I
can when somebody is first
traumatized everybody if they are normal
will have
symptoms if you get traumatized you will
experience fear
you will experience
hypervigilance you will want to fight or
flee or you might freeze or you might
surrender you might beg for forgiveness
or Mercy or what
you everybody is going to have those
reactions in my mind those reactions are
not disorders they are not
malfunctioning brains or malfunctioning
anything
um so everybody will have that
however when that
happens it immediately changes your
metabolism your metabolis the easiest
way to understand it is the sympathetic
nervous system gets turned on fiercely
if the trauma is really
bad because you have to defend
yourself your life is threatened your
safety is
threatened traumas can even be less
extreme than that you can have highly
stressful events in which maybe even
though your physical life isn't
threatened maybe all your money is
threatened the stock market crashes and
you lose
everything and you now think I'm
worthless I'm
penniless I'm losing my status in
society I'm going to have to live a very
different life I've just disappointed
everybody who depends on
me that could be a trauma even though by
definition because it doesn't threaten
your life it's not technically
considered a trauma so for those people
that are you know they've been through a
traumatic event what then is going on in
their body as it relates to metabolism
based on that traumatic event trauma
immediately changes
metabolism so trauma puts us
into
this you know most people know it as
fight ORF flight
mode um and again there are other
responses that one can have you can
surrender you can freeze you can do
other things but um when people feel
threatened either physically or their
reputation is threatened or their
identity is
threatened immediately they're nervous
system and hormones are
changing and the reason they're changing
is because your our bodies are hardwired
to protect us and in order to protect us
it means that we need more energy and we
need it now we need more energy in order
to be able to run or fight or whatever
we need to do and that means that our
heart rate goes up our blood glucose
goes up cortisol is flowing
[Music]
adrenaline is flowing through the
body inflammation is actually
occurring and epigenetic changes are
occurring memory formation is occurring
in a powerful way during a trauma
memory our brains are hardwiring this
event so that we remember it we remember
this threatened us and you cannot forget
this this is not a trivial moment you
must remember this for the rest of your
life because it's threatening your
survival and you must remember how to
respond to this again not necessarily
because our responses can be all over
the map sometimes our responses can be
quite effective and other times
people can
die they don't respond effectively and
they are killed I mean that would be the
worst case scenario and then there's
everything in between where you you get
a suboptimal outcome you end up homeless
with your psychotic mother that's not a
very effective response when I asked
that question I was asking as we see
patterns in trauma like a trauma pattern
there's a trigger there's a response and
then you know I even think about some of
the low you small te traumas that I had
in my life that meant that I would run
from romantic commitment for the rest of
my life for example and it was like a
pattern I was going through the same
Loop over and over again trigger Steve's
response is like this causes this
outcome
trigger so I was wondering if I learned
at that very young age that cycle
somewhere in my like neurons in my brain
so that's why I said do we then learn
the response to that trauma at that
point as well we we learn the response
we remember the response that we did MH
and as long as we've survived that is
the ingrained memory the ingrained
memory is when this happens do this
because this is what I did and I
survived it and so that becomes the
default and then that becomes a default
pattern for many people MH at some point
in
life it can be act actually be quite
useful to look at that response okay so
when I was 5 years old or 20 years old
or whatever and that thing happened I
responded this way and I survived it
great but how's this working out for me
now is that the optimal
response it's not about beating yourself
up for I should have done something
different back then it's simply about
recognizing and honoring I I did what I
thought I was the right thing to do I
did my best back then but I'm smarter
now I'm older now I'm Wiser now
if I could do it again if I could go
back in time as my smarter wiser
self would I do it differently and what
would the outcome be if I did it
differently and then that becomes highly
relevant to today so when I'm in this
romantic relationship
now I keep having this urge to break
up because this person is disappointing
ing me in this way and I feel like she
or he is going to threaten me or betray
me or
whatever and is that the right approach
is it true that this person is going to
betray me like the person in the past
did or am I hyp sensitive to that am I
again we're wired to look for any clue
that a trauma might happen again so
we're we're going to over
interpret things
sometimes in an in a in an erroneous way
so that early trauma or that trauma I
experienced made my body go into that
survival mode fired all kinds of ways
and my glucose levels went out my all of
these things all metabolism related
stuff happened how does that then cause
a mental health disorder at some point
down the line if that trauma is not
resolved so for some
people they can experience a trauma they
can be quite
effective at mitigating it and move on
with their
life somebody could get into a fight
somebody could get mugged on the street
they're just walking down the street
somebody pulls a knife on them or a gun
on them and wants to Rob them if
somebody manages that trauma highly
effectively let's say you happen to have
a black belt in karate and you disarm
your as salent very quickly and
rapidly you may not think twice about
the trauma you may actually be
emboldened after that traumatic event
and think I'm quite effective and
skilled wow those karate classes really
came in handy and um I'm quite powerful
and maybe even feel a little more
confident than you normally would and
that's the interpretation element right
of the situation so two people could be
in the same situation but have so that
person still had the same physiological
reactions a gun in your face or or
wherever that person's glucose was going
up their heart rate was going up all of
those metabolic changes were
occurring but so that's a success story
and that's probably a resilient person
who moves on and never thinks twice
about that trauma or rarely think thinks
about it and thinks about it with pride
if they do think about it in the case
where it doesn't go well at all let's
leave the extreme out where the person
is
murdered let's leave something less
severe than that but the person is
beaten they are injured
severely they are terrified to go out in
public
for fear that there could be another one
just like that that
person their fighter flight system is
not turning
off their fighter flight system is now
on at least at a low level possibly a
very high level for a very prolonged
period of
time they are now afraid of the world
immediately after that type of horrific
assault they are now afraid of the world
they probably aren't sleeping as well
and what's happening physiologically and
we know this is that those higher
cortisol levels are actually causing
something called hyper metabolism their
mitochondria are actually working on
overtime because the body is still
primed for the world is
unsafe everything is unsafe Maybe that
person who assaulted me is going to
somehow figure out where I live and come
through that door any minute so you're
sleeping at night and you hear a sound
or you hear a
creek and you panic and you wake up and
you're startled and you're terrified or
you sleep at night and you have a
nightmare and you wake up and you're
reliving that experience and just you're
horrified and overwhelmed again is it is
this conscious because you know often
you speak to people with severe anxiety
and they have panic attacks and they
don't know what why they're having panic
attacks they can't name something that
they're scared of or a fear they have no
this is not at all conscious so at this
point in the week or two after a
horrific trauma like I've
described I would argue this is not a
disorder this is not the brain
malfunctioning this isn't the body
malfunctioning the brain and body are
doing precisely what they are programmed
to do protect
you your life is in
danger why because somebody just tried
to take it and they were close they came
close to taking your life they could
have killed you and so your body and
brain are trying to protect you
unfortunately that comes at a
cost all of this energy going toward the
defense system means that
energy that should be going toward
maintaining your cells
is actually being bypassed
sometimes so we know this so for example
there are these things called stress
granules where cells that are trying to
just do basic ho hum everyday repair
work create some new proteins or new
receptors or you know do some cleanup
work the code for those which are called
messenger RNA
actually get sequestered in these little
bubbles called stress
granules and what that means is that
they're not getting done the the
messages are starting from your DNA
because the cell is saying hey I need
some repair work over here send some new
proteins over here to do some repair
work when your body is in fighter flight
mode those messages actually get
interrupted and that means means bottom
line it means that when you feel
threatened your body is diverting
metabolic resources toward your
self-defense system hypervigilance be
ready to run at any minute be ready to
fight off the offender at any minute you
cannot feel safe don't feel
safe when that goes on for a prolong
period of time your cells can fall into
a state of disrepair because metabolic
resources are not going towards cell
maintenance if that occurs long enough
or in a severe enough way it means that
some of your cells can now fall into a
state of
disrepair and they can begin to
malfunction when that happens if it's
happening in brain
cells that's when I would say the person
has crossed the line from a normal
survival reaction to
trauma if their cells in their brain
begin to malfunction now because they
are on a state of
disrepair they that can turn into what
we call a mental illness and that means
that maybe they can't remember like they
used to it means that maybe and and now
they're they can't pay attention like
they used to now somebody might say hey
maybe you've got some ADHD going on or
they their anxiety Pathways become
what's called hyper
excitable and now their anxiety pathways
are being triggered even when they
shouldn't be triggered and out of the
blue they're having panic attacks or
anxiety symptoms they can be sitting in
the comfort of their own home not
thinking any scary thoughts not having
any not watching anything on television
or anything that's really disturbing and
out of the blue they can just be
overwhelmed with a panic attack and that
person I would say if they have a panic
attack for no reason that person's brain
is now malfunctioning it is
disregulated and I would say that that
person has now crossed over into what I
would call a mental disorder where their
brain is in fact malfunctioning
now the great news the
hope and we can get to more of it is
that that those cells can be
repaired we can fix that we can do
something about
that the person does not need to be like
that
forever this notion that they now have a
chemical imbalance that they were
probably genetically predisposed to and
now we've got to just medicate them for
the rest of their
life I don't agree with that I'm not at
all opposed to medication if medications
can be helpful to that person 100% let's
use them Let's help that person heal and
recover but I want to go deeper I want
to understand what is happening in that
person's brain and body using this kind
of information about metabolism and
mitochondria and how can we effectively
help them heal and repair and and
recover you know we talk a lot about
diet and food on this show um as it
relates to metabolism and mental
health
diet so diet is
huge and most people have no clue that
diet plays any role in mental illness or
mental health
95% of mental health clinicians think
it's
laughable that anybody would suggest
that diet can play a role in mental
illness I think it's laughable what do
you think I
think if you do a deep dive into the
science all of the science that we have
accumulated over the last 100 years and
longer sometimes
that if you do a deep dive into all of
those neuroimaging studies that we've
been doing all of the genetic studies
we've been doing all of the
neurotransmitter and hormone studies and
Trauma studies and adverse childhood
experiences studies if you do a deep
dive into the
science and you understand what is
happening in the brains and bodies of
people as a consequence of those things
or what could be causing those things if
you put it all together you come to this
sound bite that mental disorders are
metabolic in nature and there is
no questioning whatsoever it is
incontrovertible that diet plays a
massive huge role in
metabolism and therefore I believe very
strongly that
diet might be playing a role in the
mental health epidemic that we are
seeing and it also might provide an
Avenue of Hope and healing and
recovery and I use the word might is the
scientist in
me is the clinician in me I know without
certainty it can heal and recover people
who have have had chronic horrible
debilitating mental
illnesses and I know from my own
personal
story when I was in medical school and
residency I'm still suffering from
lowgrade depression OCD other symptoms
but I also developed what's called
metabolic syndrome I developed high
blood pressure high
cholesterol um pre-diabetes and I wasn't
really overweight I was EX exercising I
was following a lowfat diet mostly a
processed foods because they're cheaper
but that was the diet that was touted as
a health a healthy diet it was low in
fat and as long as it was low in fat
that was supposed to be good for us and
my metabolic syndrome just kept getting
worse and worse and so at some
point in order to treat my metabolic
syndrome I changed my diet to
essentially a low carbohydrate diet
and
within 3
months my metabolic syndrome was
completely
gone but the thing that just dumbfounded
me was that my mental
health was better than it had ever been
in my entire life and I just couldn't
believe what I was experiencing I didn't
know that I could be that kind of a
person I didn't know that I could be
happy and positive and energetic and
confident I had no idea I I didn't think
that was in
me and by changing my diet all of those
things
happened at the level of the
mitochondria are you saying do you
believe that because you changed your
diet
to more sort of natural healthier foods
at the level of the mitochondria the
mitochondria were able to function more
more naturally themselves and in a in a
more um yeah functional way which meant
that they released the chemicals they
released in the processes they go
through were more consistent with
positive mental health is that like the
simpleton's way of understanding it and
before then you talked about man-made
compounds in the foods Etc I'm assuming
you're saying that some of the modern
foods that we eat the ultr processed
food that have all these random named
chemicals inside them that we see on the
labels the mitochondria don't know how
to deal with that so it's causing the
same sort of disregulation and
dysfunction that they might see if we'd
gone through like an extreme trauma or
something else or some other adverse
environmental situation it's just this
dysfunction of the mitochondria which is
causing the KnockOn effects we see but
there's many things that can cause
dysfunction in the mitochondria and we
name we went through a bunch of them
earlier is that like a simple way of
understanding it 100% okay great it's
perfect so super
interesting okay so on that point then
we have to zoom in on this thing of
diet if you wanted my mitochondria to be
perfect and maybe even give me a case
that of I don't know patients you've
worked with that you've you you've
prescribed a certain diet to what diet
what food would you tell me to eat and
what would you tell me not to
eat so I actually don't have a one siiz
fits all
prescription and so I to say that up
front so I would want to know who am I
working
with and how is their mental and
metabolic Health now me so you yeah so I
would want more details are you having
symtoms of any mental health condition I
would say no however I can I can have
moments where I feel a little bit
anxious so you know I've been through a
lot of I'd say like stressful events in
my life because I was running a big
business we had hundreds of employees
paydays all the time so I had this at
one point I had this constant subtle
stress and so I would want to know do
you feel like you have
anxiety For No Good Reason sometimes
sometimes it can feel a little bit like
that um it's very infrequent I'd
say but I can also have moments where I
just think of something and then I get
the same kind of like it's almost like
the fal FL response has just kicked in
but you think of something adverse or
stressful yeah yeah yeah so so the so
the one thing I would say about
that
and we could get into a lot more details
which we probably don't want to do Now
podcast but my my strong guess based on
just what you've said is that that level
of Stress and
Anxiety is quote unquote normal okay
because you you are sensing I have to go
do something that's really scary right
now or I have to go do something that's
going to ruin someone's life or that
that might threaten My
Success it is normal and actually
healthy to have anxiety and stress in
those
situations the anxiety and stress can
sometimes be quite helpful and adaptive
because it can make you pause and
reflect on is this really what I want to
do as opposed to being overly confident
and just
[Music]
proceeding your own personal history
almost certainly informs your level of
stress
response and again so if you go back to
your own
traumas you're going to remember when
I'm facing a situation like this it's
helpful to be on hyper alert it's
helpful to be
hypervigilant and your body and brain
will remember that helped you navigate
this safely and effectively but if I
have that profile if I have that sort of
mental health profile now as I sit here
and then for the next decade I
ate processed junk
food am I going to send my mitochondria
into disarray which is going to increase
the probability that I have a mental
health disorder yes I think yes we've
got you know we there's no way we will
ever be able to do a human randomized
controlled trial to test that precise
unethical
hypothesis but we have large
epidemiological studies that strongly
suggest that people who eat a lot of
ultra processed food have
higher risk for developing depression
anxiety and other mental
disorders and based on the science the
granular
science based on animal models so we can
do that to mice and rats and in fact
that's exactly what we see in mice and
rats we feed them an obesogenic
diet which is usually high in fat high
in
carbohydrates Ultra processed foods some
researchers have C fed rats and mice
cafeteria Di diets where they feed them
a lot of delicious junk food and those
mice develop higher rates of obesity but
also higher rates of diabetes and
pre-diabetes and oh by the way also
higher rates of depression and anxiety
because those are the two things that we
can kind of measure in M rats we can't
necessarily measure ADHD symptoms it's
really hard to actually measure
psychotic symptoms
um but we can measure depression and
anxiety symptoms pretty well in animals
and so in animal models we know that
that's unequivocally
true and we see the same in humans
though because I was reading your book
and in chapter 4 you say people with
ADHD are more likely to develop obesity
people are who are obese are 50% more
likely to develop bipolar and 25% more
likely to develop anxiety or depression
and weight gain around the time of
puberty leads to a
400% increase in the chance of
depression by the age of 24
yes and insulin resistance at age
nine makes increases your chances of
developing a psychotic at risk mental
state which is like meaning you're at
high risk for developing schizophrenia
or bipolar disorder 500% and
Alzheimer's all mental disorders are
associated with an increased risk of
Alzheimer's disease anywhere from the
lowest is 50% increase risk and the
highest is 2,000% increased risk and the
thread that unites all of these problems
is metabolism
metabolism and at the end of the day you
have to talk about mitochondria in order
to understand
metabolism um only 7% of
US
citizens have no signs of metabolic
health problem
meaning
93% or so of us residents will have at
least one of the biomarkers of metabolic
syndrome meaning they have pre-diabetes
or abnormal lipids or high blood
pressure or abdominal obesity or
abdominal fat excessive abdominal fat so
what do we offer those
93% so those people
diet interventions would absolutely be a
part of a healing
strategy a part of it not the only
strategy I would want to know about
their sleep I would want to know about
substance use I would want to know about
medications lots of things but for
dietary interventions I would want to
meet them where they're at and just find
out well where are you at what are you
eating do you have preferences or
demands for what your diet should be
could you give me a case study then
maybe a more extreme case study from
your practice that you've
seen I could I can give you the simple
cases
where which probably apply to the
majority of human beings on the
planet but if it's okay I'd rather give
you the extreme
case because a lot of people are
skeptical they they probably hear me
saying this and they think well you're
just talking about General Health and
Wellness what about people with real
mental illness what about people like
your mother whose lives were decimated
by mental illness this doesn't have
anything to do with
them and what I'm here to say is no
actually this has everything to do with
them
too but yes it applies to just common
everyday people
but you know probably so one story
that I will just share to just because
it's probably one of the most powerful
stories I know it was a
woman whose real name was
Doris and um in the book I called her
Mildred because I changed everybody's
names but she actually gave me
permission to use her real name so in
honor of her I want to use her real
name so she was a woman who actually had
a horrible abuse of childhood lots of
trauma
and by the time she turned 17 she
started having daily hallucinations and
delusions and was diagnosed with
schizophrenia over the ensuing
decades she tried numerous antipsychotic
mood
stabilizers um anti-depressants and
other medicines but none of them stopped
her symptoms she remained with all of
the symptoms of
schizophrenia she ended up gaining a
massive amount of
weight she ended up weighing about 330
lb by the time she was
70 her life was devastated by this
diagnosis she had a cour appointed
Guardian to manage her financial affairs
and other Affairs she had professionals
coming into her home to help her with
paying bills and grocery shopping and
stuff like that because she couldn't do
it for herself which is not at all unus
usual for people with schizophrenia and
between the ages of 68 and
70 she tried to kill herself at least
six times and was hospitalized for those
suicide attempts she hated herself and
she hated her
life when she was 70 years old her
doctor told her you're overweight and
you need to go lose some weight and she
was she was referred to a weight loss
clinic at Duke University where they
just so happened to be using the
ketogenic diet as a dietary inter as a
weight loss
tool and for whatever reason she decided
to give it a try and so she tries the
ketogenic
diet and within two weeks not only does
she start losing weight but she notices
dramatic reduction in her hallucinations
and
delusions within months all of her
symptoms of schizophrenia were in full
and complete remission
she starts tapering off her psychiatric
meds within about six months she was off
all of her psychiatric meds and her
symptoms of schizophrenia remained in
[Music]
remission Doris went on to live for
another 15
years symptom free medication
free out of psychiatric hospitals no
more suicide attempts she stopped saying
mental health professionals pretty
quickly because they were kind of
worthless in their mind they hadn't
really helped all that
much she lost 150 lbs and kept it off
until the day she died she ended up
dying at the age of 85 of Co
pneumonia and
um but her
story tells
us like we could get if if you want we
don't have to we could get into the
science of the ketogenic diet and what
it's doing to metabolism and
mitochondria I love to know but there's
an entire story that helps us understand
what happened to her and how
exactly that resulted in her really
spectacular and almost miraculous
recovery so so unbeknownst to most
people most people know that ketogenic
diet is a fad diet and a lot of people
are really worried about it they they've
heard that it's dangerous you know it'll
give you a heart attack you'll
die unbeknownst to most people the
ketogenic diet was developed over a
hundred years ago now by a physician for
one and only one purpose it was
developed to stop
seizures and in fact the ketogenic diet
has been studied
extensively for its effects on the brain
over the past 100 years and it is an
evidence-based
treatment for
epilepsy and the reason that is so
important is
because we use epilepsy treatments in
Psychiatry all the time lots of the
medications that we prescribe to
psychiatric patients are in fact
epilepsy
treatments and so we know that there's a
lot of overlap between epilepsy and
mental illness and that treatments that
help with epilepsy can also help with
mental
illness and so we actually know more
about the biology of the ketogenic diet
and its effects on the brain than we do
any other dietary
intervention it changes neurotransmitter
systems it decreases brain inflammation
it changes the gut microbiome in
beneficial ways it actually changes gene
expression or
epigenetics but most important and
relevant to my theory is it improves
mitochondria and mitochondrial
function and and if you do it long
enough over a long enough period of time
you can actually
repair mitochondrial dysfunction in
cells at least for some
people and and then you can actually
stop the diet so in the epilepsy world
when neurologists use this diet to stop
seizures it's usually not a lifetime
treatment they usually only need to do
the diet for anywhere from two to 5
years
many people about a third of people who
have treatment resistant seizures will
become
seizure-free and another third so 2/3
total another third will have a dramatic
reduction in seizure
frequency so that leaves a third for
whom it's not really working but these
are people with treatment resistant
epilepsy and there's no treatment that's
going to work for everybody because we
need to look at all the other things
involved if say somebody has seizure
sensation they get rid of their seizures
on a ketogenic diet usually they have to
do it for two to five years somewhere in
there and their clinician will help them
decide how long they should do it and
then they can stop the diet and most
often the seizures don't come back it
seems to actually heal the brain what is
that diet adding or subtracting from the
body that's causing that pretty
phenomenal effect do people know the
real answer is we don't entirely
understand we don't know I mean the
ketogenic diet removes sugar for example
it
does um pretty much EX entirely I mean
I've been on that diet for about was on
the diet for about eight weeks or so
just a
try and I could I couldn't have anything
with sugar in it pretty much no sugar no
carbohydrates very few
carbohydrates
the so some people will argue well the
diet is getting rid of gluten and gluten
is is maybe the toxic thing other people
will argue oh the diet is adding like
some extra protein or meat and maybe
that's replacing a nutrient deficiency
like vitamin B12 deficiency or something
like that or iron deficiency and all of
those things might be true for some
people I don't think those are the
primary
explanation I mean obviously if somebody
has vitamin B12 deficiency replacing
vitamin B12 is essential somebody has
iron deficiency yes recognizing that and
replacing it but most people don't have
those deficiencies and they can still
have mental symptoms or mental health
problems I believe what the diet is
doing is it it forces a transition in
brain and body metabolism essentially
and that act that transition is actually
mediated through mitochondria so the
ketogenic diet forces your liver to
start producing Ketone bodies so it
forces your liver to break down fat so
you're you're losing fat from your fat
stores but that fat is being shuttled to
the liver and then the liver takes that
fat and breaks it down um and I mean I
shouldn't say all of the fat is being
shuttled to the liver some of the fat is
going to muscles and other tissues and
just being used
directly but a fair amount of the fat is
actually being shuttled to the liver and
then that fat is being converted into
Ketone bodies some of it is being
converted into glucose so that you
maintain normal glucose levels through
this those Ketone bodies are then going
up to the brain and fueling brain cells
but those Ketone bodies are actually
doing so much more they're they're
changing mitochondrial function they're
changing epigenetics they're changing
neurotransmitters and inflammation and
all sorts of things but at the end of
the day I'm convinced that it's really
the metabolic changes and the
mitochondrial changes that are
so important and that are so
instrumental in these dramatic
improvements and things like stopping
seizures or stopping hallucinations and
delusions what about F fasting there's
been a lot of talk especially recently
about fasting and the impact that that
can have on our mental health do you
think
fasting is a positive for our mental
health I so it depends on the person
okay and so the ketogenic diet actually
mimics the fasting State that's what
that's why it was produced all right the
ketogenic diet was actually developed by
a
physician recognizing that fasting can
have really powerful brain effects
including stopping seizures if you if
you're out on an island and Your Friends
start seizing uncontrollably the best
thing to do is to fast them even if the
seizures stop intermittently you would
think oh let's feed you to you know keep
up your sustenance and you know take
care of you the best thing to do for
your friend if they are seizing
repetitively over days or months the
best thing to do is to fast your friend
and to tell them let's have you go
without food for a few days and that can
stop the seizures wow the the challenge
with fasting is that you could starve to
death if you do it long that's not a
that's not a very good treatment for
your friend on the island and this
physician who developed the ketogenic
diet recognized that and so that's why
he developed the ketogenic diet was
really looking to see can we mimic the
fasting state with a
diet and um and get these longer term
benefits so back to your question can
fasting play a role 100% yes fasting can
play a
role and fasting is doing pretty much
the same thing that the ketogenic diet
is doing it's changing mitochondrial
biology it's improving mitochondrial
function changing neurotransmitters
changing the gut microbiome improving
insulin signaling and insulin resistance
it's doing all sorts of beneficial
things there are a couple of caveats
with fasting though one is that people
who are underweight should not fast so
that includes people with eating
disorder ERS who are emaciated or
underweight but it also includes people
like who have had severe
depression and lost weight as a result
of their severe depression or people
with cancer who have lost a significant
amount of
weight fasting is not good for them
fasting mimicking diets like ketogenic
diets May in fact be very powerful for
those people but it but they it needs to
be done in a safe supervised Medical Way
sugar what impact does that have on the
mitochondria if I've got a super high
sugar diet is that impacting my
mitochondria in some way and therefore
my metabolism it is um so
low low intake of
sugar in people who are otherwise
healthy is perfectly fine and
acceptable so you
know lots of people can
consume treats every now and then or
desserts a few times a week or you know
special holiday they can maybe even
binge on sugar over the
holidays and they don't have any
problems as a result of it and that is
fine if that's the way it's working out
again only 7% of the
population is metabolically healthy so
the majority of people that's not the
way it's working out so high levels of
sugar over
time we
know can impair mitochondrial function
so there's this term called oxidative
stress and oxidative stress is primarily
it's directly related to mitochondria
because mitochondria are producing the
energy and then that energy production
results in oxidative stress and and
oxidative stress we've known for decades
is bad for
cells and it is highly correlated with
all of the metabolic disorders and all
of the mental disorders high levels of
oxidative stress at in different cells
and different people with different
diagnoses high levels of oxidative
stress are a unifying theme but that is
a reflection of mitochondrial
dysfunction so we know that if you eat
if you eat a lot of sugar over
time it can
disregulated glucose levels and then
those high glucose levels can cause
mitochondrial dysfunction and you can
end up kind of on the downward spiral
what about caffeine and these stimulants
there's like pre-workout stimulants and
you know before you do a workout you
have a big dose of this pre-workout and
it kind of makes you go like you
know do you have a view on caffeine in
these sort of energy
stimulants I do so so so caffeine gets
complicated because we have to talk
about whether it's in tea or coffee or
not cuz tea and coffee are are different
stories and they have other compounds
that almost certainly are beneficial to
human health um and whether it's the
caffeine itself or not is still kind of
a question an open
question caffeine stimulates metabolism
in cells we know that so it it blocks
the adenosine recept
ctor and the adenosine recept the
function of the adenosine receptor and
adenosine on it is to slow a cell down
it's basically a a feedback loop that
slows cells down it it inhibits their
function so when we block a Denine we
basically stimulate the system and we
stimulate our
brains and if you have low
metabolic brain function that can
actually be really good if you are
feeling tired and sluggish it can make
you feel energized and clear
thinking the challenge is that you can
overdo it so when you stimulate it too
fast that in and of itself can end up
causing oxidative stress or
mitochondrial
dysfunction maybe the easiest way to
think about it is this if you think
about a car you have a an accelerator
and a
break if you're going to maximize the
cars
function there's a right balance for all
of
that you don't want to floor the
accelerator and you don't want to
underdo the accelerator likewise you
want to determine like you don't want to
be pushing on the accelerator and The
Brak at the same time so when we think
about metabolism and mitochondria when
we think about caffeine or even
glucose caffeine and glucose are
stimulating the system they are through
different mechanisms but they are both
stimulating energy
production but when you overdo it it
would be like flooring the
accelerator and then possibly putting on
the break at the same time because you
don't want to be going that fast because
you're going to crash so either you're
going to floor the accelerator crash and
burn or you're going to floor the
accelerator and slam on the brake at the
same time you're not serving your car
well by doing that by flooring the
accelerator and pushing on the brake and
when we use
substances like caffeine or alcohol or
marijuana which are all working at the
level of metabolism and mitochondria
when we use those substances in essence
we're using accelerators or brakes for
cells and we can overshoot or undershoot
so it's not that I'm against the use of
those things if you use reasonable small
to moderate amounts of those on a
regular basis I'm all for it so I drink
coffee every day every morning to
disclose my
bias to disclose my bias I drink coffee
every morning um about two cups of
coffee every morning but that's my
routine I don't go beyond that I don't
drink coffee in the afternoon um when I
do drink coffee in the afternoon I
notice it starts to interfere with my
sleep and then that throws me off I have
to ask you as well I've had so many
parents messag me about autism and ADHD
so many you know I've had so many
concerned parents message me
specifically on Instagram saying please
Steve you know I've had a child
diagnosed with um ISM they're trying to
understand it they're trying to get good
information on it you've used the word
autism and ADHD as we've been speaking
about metabolism what is the link in
your view everything the link is
everything so the really the
mitochondrial theory of autism actually
was first proposed in
1985 and since then we have had an
explosion of research linking
mitochondria and mitochondrial
dysfunction to autism
specifically as I've mentioned to you
the rates of autism have gone through
the roof in the United States they've
quadrupled in the last 20 years and
people think well what does that have to
do with diet those kids haven't eaten a
diet yet well their parents have and let
me share a couple of Statistics so
people are scratching their heads
where's all this autism coming from I
thought autism was
genetic and if autism is genetic it
shouldn't quadruple in 20
years quadrupling in 20 years means
something in the environment is causing
it and to to provide just
one piece of evidence to support what
I'm saying if a
woman has
obesity she has doubled the risk of
having an autistic
child if a woman has diabetes she has
double the risk of having an autistic
child if a woman has both obesity and
diabetes she has quadruple the risk of
having an autistic
child if a man is
obese he has double the risk of having
an autistic
child so people are scratching their
heads trying to figure out where is all
this a ISM coming from well look around
in the
population are the rates of obesity
going up are the rates of diabetes going
up the answer is unequivocally
yes and that is a reflection it's not
about fat shaming I don't want anybody
to hear that and wag their finger at fat
people and say oh you're causing autism
because you're overeating it's not that
simple that's not the way it
goes people with obesity have a
metabolic or mitochondrial problem that
is why they have
obesity now that might be caused by the
foods they're
eating but they don't know any better
usually they think it's just about
calories and what I'm here to say is no
there's more to food than just calories
it might be those chemicals in the food
that you're eating or something else or
it might be chemicals in our environment
it might be
pesticides or microplastics the forever
chemicals that are becoming more and
more ubiquitous all of these things
disrupt metabolism and mitochondrial
function and so when I talk about
obesity and
diabetes increasing risk for autism it's
not about fat shaming it's about
understanding it's about understanding
that the parents have a metabolic
problem already that means that they
have a problem in their cells with their
mitochondria and they then pass those on
to their children and in some
cases it may not show itself immediately
as obesity or diabetes it might show
itself as a brain
condition because lots of other things
can play a
role and if an obese woman for instance
also has an infection during
pregnancy that's going to increase her
risk for having an autistic child even
more so she couldn't help whether she
got an infection or
not tragically we just had an
epidemic called
covid and the early signs are telling
us that in fact neurodevelopmental
disorders are going to increase as a
result of that we already had a
quadrupling of the rates of autism we
are likely to see
even worse statistics going
forward the
hope is that if we understand that
science we can do something about it now
today if you understand if you see signs
of autism in your child if you s see
signs of metabolic or mental health
conditions in your children if we
intervene early enough we can probably
do something about it
how number one by
recognizing the problem and then two for
some people it could be as simple as
dietary
interventions or just hyperfocusing on
good clean living so that means
prioritizing sleep little less screen
time
little more human contact purpose and
life you know family connection no
alcohol no alcohol no marijuana no
CBD try to avoid pills try to avoid
pills for everything that ails you if
your child's
sleeping please try methods other than
pills including melatonin and
over-the-counter pills don't just whip
out a pill for your child not being able
to sleep at least try some other
interventions like let's get you off the
screen two hours before bed let's
develop a routine in our household that
we're all going to wind down we're all
going to turn off the electronics maybe
I'm going to read you a bedtime story or
we're going to play a game or we're
going to do something really boring that
everybody's going to say this is so
boring I'm getting sleepy and I'm going
to say great you're it's so boring that
you're getting sleepy that means you're
going to go to sleep because it's
bedtime want to talk to you about our
sponsor LinkedIn for all the
entrepreneurs and business owners that
listen to this podcast you'll probably
want to hear this one so stay tuned for
a second whenever you're scaling and
building a business your business needs
are completely unique and I've been
there I know what struggles you're
facing and what allows you to land your
next dream client and one tool that is
an absolute must is LinkedIn ads you'll
have direct access to a billion LinkedIn
members yes a billion members access to
70 million decision makers and 10
million c-level Executives on LinkedIn
the pool of individuals that LinkedIn
allows you to access is insane and
uncomparable and you'll know if you
follow me on LinkedIn how prolific I am
on LinkedIn LinkedIn to me is actually
the highest returning paid social
platform and I don't think people quite
realize that so I'm giving you the diio
community a
$100 credit on your next LinkedIn ad
campaign head to linkedin.com doac 24 to
get started now the link is in the
description below if you listen to this
podcast frequently there's something I
talk about very often and that is the
subject of sleep and so I dug down a
pretty deep sleep Rabbit Hole to figure
out how I could sleep better one of the
things that I found is a brand called
Eight sleep that sponsor this podcast
and that is the cover that I have on my
bed I saw the variance in my performance
my ability to talk my mood and
everything that matters to me when I'm
unslept it regulates the temperature of
both sides of my bed individually so my
partner can have cold I can have a
little bit warmer and it learns about my
body and sets my bed to the temperature
that I need to have optimal sleep the
brands that I talk about on this this
show the podcast sponsors that I have
are brands that I love and use and eight
sleep is one of them they've made that
piece of foam that we all sleep on for
eight hours a day smart I've put a link
in the description below but you can go
to 8sleep.com
stepen for exclus exive holiday
savings I have to ask you mentioned that
you moved in with your mother to try and
save
her um when she had was suffering with a
multitude of sort of mental health
disorders what is that like as a child I
I was trying to imagine if I moved in
with my mother when she was you use the
word delusional right what is that like
I've heard people speak to me about a
parent with dementia and that kind of
that loss but what is the loss like that
you experienced if I was a fly on the
wall in those moments what would I have
seen and if I was a fly inside of your
heart what would I have
felt it was actually
really horrendously
awful
um when I first moved in with her we had
a little bit of money still and so we
were living in a rooming house we were
renting rooms
at some point the money ran out and the
support that we were getting wasn't
enough and that's when we became
homeless but almost from day
one living with someone who is severely
depressed and
suicidal and
psychotic it's hard to not feel that
your
self it's like you're living in
this just
oppressive cloud of
Despair and it's everywhere it's in the
air like when you're in the home with
that person it's in the air that you're
breathing it it's hard to describe
it but that hopelessness just overwhelms
I mean you try to cheer the person up
and it's just
feudal and I
remember I think the first like three or
four months I lived with
her I like cried myself to sleep every
night like just sobbing
crying crying into my pillow so that she
wouldn't hear me CU I didn't want to
burden
her but I did know what to do I was just
I was it was just
overwhelming and after about four months
I actually I couldn't cry
anymore I just lost the ability to cry I
became
numb I just I I couldn't
tolerate those emotions that just
despair I couldn't I couldn't manage it
that actually persisted with me for
probably like like 20
years I wasn't able to cry for like 20
years there was a part of me that just
felt like you know crying is weakness
and crying is feudal it doesn't do
anything it doesn't solve any
problems
um it's interesting CU When I was with
her I hadn't gotten to the point of
suicidality myself I was desperately
wanting to stay alive to see if I could
help her and keep her
alive within about a year of that
though I started developing my own
suicidality
and
um and that persisted in me for years
after um I tried to kill myself several
times I was injuring myself I was doing
all sorts of
[Music]
things I was very I was actually
convinced if you asked me at the time I
would have said I was 100% certain that
I wouldn't be alive to the age of
20 I I knew with certainty that I would
be dead and I knew that I just couldn't
tolerate living and that there was no
hope for me
whatsoever Chris thank you your um book
is full of solutions and it's full of
Hope and I think that's why it's such an
incredibly important book and it's a a
book that has The Bravery
to illuminate another set of answers and
another path forward out of the Despair
and the epidemic of mental health um
illness that we're unfortunately I agree
we're heading we are in and increasingly
heading towards if that makes sense it's
certainly increasing in prevalence a
revolutionary breakthrough and
understanding mental health and
improving treatment for anxiety
depression OCD PTSD and much more brain
energy really really remarkable book and
Once upon once in a while books come
along that challenge the status quo in
the most necessary way and your book is
certainly one of them we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're leaving it
for and the question that's been left
for you is you were known for your work
Chris but what would you like to be
known for
as the human that you
are I think I would like people to
know like I've shared with you
today that I was
somebody who had given up on
myself who actually thought there's no
possible way I could ever have a future
I could ever live a meaningful or even
tolerable
life and that all has
changed and if it can change for me and
you happen to be one of those people in
a similar state right now it can change
for you
too Chris thank you thank you so much
you know there's this
um there's this wonderful quote that I
read earlier from the start of your book
where you send that message to your
mother my fure T attempts to save you
from the ravages of mental illness lit a
fire in me that burns to this day I'm
sorry I didn't figure this out in time
to help you may you rest in peace but I
have to point out the fact that the work
you're doing the passion you're bringing
to it the wisdom and the 28 years of
study and Care you've put into all of
the work that exists in your book and
your wider work is saving many people's
mothers thousands of people's of their
mothers their fathers their daughters
their
sons and that I think is an absolutely
incredible thing so be on behalf of all
of those people that you'll absolutely
never meet you'll meet many of them sure
many of them messages you message you
but all of the ones that aren't able to
or haven't yet I just want to extend a
big thank you for the work you've done
in your life for those mothers for those
fathers for those daughters and for
those
Sons thank you
Steve
[Music]
as you'll know if you've listened to
this podcast before I'm an investor in a
company called hu I'm on their board and
they sponsor this podcast and I have a
very exciting announcement to make this
product called Daily Greens is one of
the most highly requested products at hu
but it's never been sold in the UK
before
until now it's often difficult to get
all of the greens into our diet that we
need to have a healthy gut microbiome
and a healthy body and with Hues Daily
Greens product with one scoop every
morning a very very delicious scoop you
can get 91 vitamins minerals and Whole
Food Source nutrients into your diet the
most important Point here is I genuinely
believe it tastes delicious it's May my
favorite heel product ever for all the
reasons I've described so if you want
access to this product the link is in
the description below it launches in the
UK in January because of the demand I'm
pretty sure it's going to sell
out do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also t absolutely
love another recent episode we've done
so I've linked that episode in the
description below I know you'll enjoy
[Music]
it